---
layout: single
excerpt: "I was confused on how authentication in PostgreSQL works. So, I did some research."
header:
  overlay_image: /images/unsplash-11.jpg
  overlay_filter: 0.3
title:  "It's backend process that authenticates users in PostgreSQL... Not Postmaster Process..."
date:   2017-01-31 01:30:13 +0800
categories: Postgresql
read: 10 minutes read
tags: github greenplum postgresql
---

Earlier I used to think that, In PostgreSQL, it is postmaster process that authenticates the user connections (Which is of course not wrong but no more). But somewhere I read like "backend process authenticates the user connections" and this made me to investigate more on this. So here I'm writing what I found :).

Back in 2000, postmaster process used to authenticate the user connections but after PostgreSQL 7.x, When user try to connect to the database, postmaster process immediately forks a new child process for authentication and same child process becomes backend process for database connection.

Here is what I found in [src/backend/postmaster/postmaster.c](https://doxygen.postgresql.org/postmaster_8c_source.html)

    When a request message is received, we now fork() immediately. The child process performs authentication of the request, and then becomes a backend if successful. This allows the auth code to be written in a simple single-threaded style (as opposed to the crufty "poor man's multitasking" code that used to be needed). More importantly, it ensures that blockages in non-multithreaded libraries like SSL or PAM cannot cause denial of service to other clients."


They made this change to eliminate problems with authentication blocking. Here is relevant [commit](https://git.postgresql.org/gitweb/?p=postgresql.git;a=commit;h=9b4bfbdc2cd74342d9febb74c93acad1d4de84ca) I found which says,

    Handle reading of startup packet and authentication exchange after forking a new postmaster child process.
    This should eliminate problems with authentication blocking (.g., ident, SSL init) and also reduce problems with the accept queue filling up under heavy load.

Also I would like to quote a line from this [documentation](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/8.2/static/connect-estab.html).

    Whenever a request for a connection is detected the process spawns a new server process.

Also, here is comment found in source code of postmaster.c from postgreSQL 6.5 (Line 803) in which postmaster used to authenticate the user connections.


    If there is no error and no outstanding data transfer going on, then the authentication handshake must be complete to the postmaster's satisfaction.  So, start the backend.
